---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/Cryptocurrency/","tags":["Cryptocurrency"]}
---


---
# Cryptocurrency
> [[Cryptography\|Cryptographically]] [[Cryptographic Encryption Algorithms\|Encrypted]] [[Decentralised Network\|Decentralised]] Tokens built on [[Blockchain\|Blockchain]] technology that can be exchanged similar to [[Fiat Money\|Fiat Currency]]. Unlike Fiat, it is not guaranteed value by any centralised government and purely dependent upon Supply & Demand & extremely volatile since it is traded like a stock on Global Cryptocurrency Exchanges all day 24x7 unlike conventional [[Stock Market\|Stock Market]] which only opens for a few hours per day.

All Encryptions in Cryptocurrencies are [[Asymmetric Key Encryption\|Asymmetric Key Encryption]] where the wallet has a Public Key to receive crypto and a Private Key to authenticate who the crypto is being sent by. Your Private Keys are different for each Cryptocurrency (different one for [[Bitcoin (BTC)\|Bitcoin (BTC)]] and different one for [[Ethereum (ETH)\|Ethereum (ETH)]] etc.) but all these Private Keys are derived from a 12 to 24 word Seed Phrase - which if you misplace, you will unable to access your wallet from a different device.

### Public vs Private Crypto
Public Crypto like [[Bitcoin (BTC)\|Bitcoin (BTC)]] and [[Ethereum (ETH)\|Ethereum (ETH)]] use a [[Public Ledger\|Public Ledger]] which notes down all the transactions that have ever happened on the [[Blockchain\|Blockchain]] with wallet IDs of senders and receivers with transaction amounts and timestamps. These earlier Cryptocurrency hoped to be private by using such long and humanly hard-to-read wallet IDs with high volume of transactions to make it humanly impossible to track them all.

Although targeted surveillance was still possible on the [[Blockchain\|Blockchain]] in case a criminal needed to be found and traced. No one thought a higher level of privacy was needed on the chain. Nowadays, (post-2022 AD) we have seen how AI can be used to analyse and draw inferences on massive amounts of data at once. We also know that new LLMs can be designed or made from existing models i.e., high volume of data that is hard to read for humans is no longer enough to maintain [[Personal Online Privacy\|Personal Digital Privacy]] and fight [[Mass-Surveillance\|Mass-Surveillance]].

Private Crypto (also called Privacy Coins and Privacy Crypto) was different, encryption such as [[Ring Signatures\|Ring Signatures]] in [[Monero (XMR)\|Monero]] or complete hiding of sender and receiver wallet IDs in crypto like [[ZCash (ZEC)\|ZCash (ZEC)]] were made to completely provide the same kind of privacy as cash online - so that your data is not harvested by payments platforms and banks & nobody knows how much money you have or how much you transact hence no one can spam call you to sell products like loans and other investment plans. Ledgers used in these cryptocurrencies are often called as a "[[Private Ledger\|Private Ledger]]".

### Purchase & Storage Tips
First things first, your Cryptocurrency is identified by Keys like [[Pointers\|Pointers]] in memory point to a memory block. If you do not own the keys or have access to them, please keep in mind that when the custodian to those keys goes down, your Crypto goes with them. Which is why it is important to be your own custodian & own your keys! Exchanges own the keys and even among wallets, go for [[Non-Custodian Wallet\|Non-Custodial Wallets]] where you are the sole custodian of your keys.

> [!tip] TIP: Custodian vs Non-Custodian Wallets
> The term "Custodian" means that someone else (generally the company behind the wallet or exchange) holds the keys for you and in case that company goes bankrupt or runs away with your money (like FDX in 2022) you can say goodbye to all your crypto since that will be inside that wallet whose contents are inaccessible to you.

Other option is to store it in Cold Storage in a HDD or SSD.
It requires an immense amount of research and setup. Moreover, if you somehow set it up but forgot your password used to access that Cold Storage, you can kiss your crypto goodbye.

Cold Storage is the equivalent to a Safe/Locker at home. Always keep your Cryptocurrency locked behind a password which is written down since if you foget the password to your safe, you're done 

The Cold Storage password may be generated by a password manager but must not be stored in one since if the password manager or the local PC or the cloud infra on which the manager runs goes down, you must be able to get to your cold storage. Store your password in a fire-proof and relatively safe location.

### Personal Usage
I started my journey in Crypto in 2020 or so with Brave Browser (so that I can watch YouTube completely ad-free) which introduced my to Crypto via Brave Rewards. Although I no longer accept Brave Rewards after India was no longer served by Uphold sometime in 2022 or 2023, it was a good exposure to a new technology while it lasted.

---
# Footnotes